Starting a design system is easy. Evolving a design system requires long-term planning. 

As UX consultants who have worked with a number of organizations to create and maintain a design system, we’ve seen many teams grapple with the confusion of a design system not working as intended after it’s created. At enterprise organizations especially, the complexity of brands, products, and team structures makes it difficult to centralize and prioritize a long-term maintenance effort, so it’s often deprioritized. And with continued neglect, the design system eventually stops addressing the problems it was created to solve.

But we’ve also seen that it’s possible to build a maintenance and evolution strategy that’s both realistic and effective—helping your enterprise team to work better and faster than ever before. In this post, we’ll walk through the strategies you can use to maintain and evolve your design system long past its original launch date.
Signs your design system isn’t working

First, if you suspect that your design system may not be working as you and your team intended, you may be experiencing the following:

    Your team is using the design system sporadically, and some teams or departments have stopped using it altogether.
    There are now multiple sources of truth for information, and some of it is outdated.
    As your team members leave, you realize that bits of knowledge about the design system are lost forever.
    Conversely, new team members are joining and don’t adapt to the system (or, they are trying to adapt but are experiencing too much friction).
    You get useful product design feedback from users or customers of your business, but you aren’t updating components in your UI library to address the feedback.
    You’re trying to update components but are accumulating technical debt.
    Reuse, multichannel use, and personalization of content (by “content,” we mean any element that conveys meaning) is cumbersome because the design system didn’t use structured content models.

If you relate to any combination of the above, don’t fret! You can still put a number of strategies in place to help your team maintain the system they worked so hard to build. 
Best practices for design system maintenance and evolution

Just as your products and services need to be nurtured and improved upon, your design system should be too. Treat your design system like a product. From a dedicated design system team to a maintenance and evolution strategy. Below are best practices to ensure your design system is getting the attention it deserves.
Don’t assume that you can “set it and forget it” 

This is by far the most common pitfall we’ve experienced after working with a partner to set up a new design system. Reaching that goal feels like a huge accomplishment, but teams assume they won’t need to put much work into the maintenance of the system beyond that milestone.

The reality is that you will need to plan for design system maintenance the same way you would any long-term project. This includes updates to the kit itself as well as:

    A long-term update strategy – This strategy should include a roadmap and backlog of activities. You should schedule even small activities and plan a cadence for updates in whatever way makes sense for your business. One of our enterprise clients plans for quarterly updates, and they invite stakeholders to kit maintenance meetings to help them fully comprehend the planning and resources required to keep the kit updated.
    Dedicated people – Ideally, you’ll have a team with people across roles and departments to keep the strategy prioritized and moving forward. This should involve content strategists who have built structured (semantic) content models to include intent as well as presentation. It is also ideal to collaborate closely with developers and content management folks who will build and use the system, for example, in a content management system, or CMS.
    A plan to keep tools within the system updated and fluid – This doesn’t have to be too structured—when it comes to incorporating tools, analysis paralysis will only slow you down.
    A communication strategy – This strategy should be focused on sharing updates with everyone who touches the system, and should include a change log that people can review passively to understand how the system has evolved and why.
    A plan to continue to evangelize the system – This will keep everyone invested and bought into the long-term benefits of the system.

Throughout this process, it’s essential to keep planning realistic for everyone—yourself and the team. If you’re not setting realistic expectations, the team could experience frustration and lose sense of the system’s value. 
Do your (internal) research

Ideally at this stage, you’ll have already done thorough research to make sure your design system is serving the needs of the people using it. But keeping an open, internal feedback loop is key to making sure the system is actually useful to people long term. This doesn’t need to be a formal process—you can gather feedback and perspectives informally during the course of maintenance. 

You can focus on core questions—like what might be stopping people from using the system and whether there are access or tooling issues—but you should also focus on how much variation is needed across departments and roles. If your system serves people working across many products and brands, get clear on what specific components they need. Collaborate with multiple teams to ensure your design system is useful for and takes into account the work of designers, developers, and content strategists; marketing and product design; etc. 

This is particularly important if your content is omnichannel or will be omnichannel in the future (e.g., delivery of content on voice assistants, different apps). A system built only with components may not be enough, and you will need to harmonize your system with structured content.

This sounds time consuming, but it will save you time later. You must ask people what they need and want from a design system, and collaborate with others in order to make it succeed.
Communicate, document, and close feedback loops

Much like consistent research, ongoing communication is essential for keeping people engaged and keeping the design system useful. Without it, the system will fall apart quickly. And because a design system is bigger than one person, you’ll need to work across multiple teams to plan for clear, consistent communication with everyone involved. 

A good communication plan involves the following:

    Make sure you have a strong, helpful storefront as a home base for sharing information. (To figure out whether it’s a strong storefront, get feedback!)
    Keep relevant people, departments, products, and brands informed about the feedback you’re integrating—and the actions you’ve taken as a result.
    Host informal events to keep people engaged and updated on what’s in progress.
    Build knowledge continuity through documentation. Product design teams change a lot, and knowledge is often lost when people leave. So, it’s important to record kit and UI library updates, decision points, important milestones, process steps, and more.

As a leader, make sure you’re communicating, too. Ask yourself: If you left today, would the system live on? If not, document and share what you know.
Plan for continuous onboarding

You might have organized an official onboarding plan once your initial kit was set up, but you should get into the habit of thinking about onboarding as a continuous activity that’s never completed. 

Regular turnover is a given on any team. New employees and contractors who join will need time (and support!) to learn the kit as well as tools like Sketch, Invision, Figma, Storybook, and others—especially if they’re used to using other tools and see the entire adoption process as a chore. Long-time members of the team will also need to refresh their knowledge and ask more detailed questions about the kit.

One way you can think about planning for onboarding is by providing a mix of formats: 

    Scheduled workshops – Though it can be tough to cover all of the onboarding information in a single workshop session and to get everyone in the same room, workshops are a great first step towards setting a reliable, predictable onboarding cadence. You’ll quickly see that it’s a valuable touchpoint to discuss questions and pain points of using the system.
    Written documentation – Wading through tons of written documentation and information (and keeping it consistently updated) can be a challenge. But, written documentation is an extremely helpful resource for people who want to catch up or get information on their own time.
    Video tutorials – Video can be time consuming to produce, but it’s an excellent alternative to in-person workshops for folks who have extra busy calendars or who need to understand how to complete a very specific task.

The key to providing a strong, consistent onboarding program is to produce a mix of materials that your team can layer together for the right needs.
Keep all contributors in sync and working on components at the same pace

One of the keys to making the system work long term is to keep an eye on your core functions—design, development, and content strategy, among others—and whether they’re working on components in the system at the same pace.
Design and development

If your design team creates a new component for the UI library but doesn’t talk to development until late in the process, for example, you’ll often have a large amount of rework to tackle. You should scope work out properly and make sure you’re communicating. Design and development gaps not only slow your team down, but they create tech debt. (Documentation is also important for keeping design and development teams in sync; they can’t work harmoniously without shared knowledge.)
Content 

It’s essential to collaborate with content folks—especially as you’re building key components of the design system. If you have modular content, you want to take collaboration with content strategists into consideration when you create the system, but also as you evolve it. This will help make the content entry process easier and improve structured content for search and other machine-readable applications. 

If content strategists weren’t involved in the system’s setup, you can still retroactively build that consideration into your existing kit and future planning. It can be challenging, but you can build structured content into the fundamentals of the design system over time—especially if you are migrating content to a new (hopefully headless) CMS or performing a redesign or refresh.

In general, it’s essential to bring content strategists into ongoing planning and conversations along with other roles on the team.

When implementing the above considerations into your system maintenance, you should eventually see evidence that your system is working as intended:

    It’s easily accessible and used as a source of truth, especially after a long period of time.
    You’re receiving positive feedback about the system from various teams (design, development, content, marketing, product, etc.).
    Kit maintenance and updates are under control and accomplished in a progressive, timely manner.
    The design system works with content models, and content strategists are giving input to components on a regular basis.
    Multiple contributors from your product design and development team are invested in and contributing to the maintenance of the design system.
    Components are coupled with content models and structured content to take into account intent as well as presentation.

Work on your design system will never be finished, but the effort is worth it

It’s tempting to adopt a “set it and forget it” mindset after completing the foundation of your design system—especially for enterprise teams who go through a considerable amount of work to establish the system in the first place. But regular maintenance will help make sure all of the work you put into setting up your system doesn’t go to waste. Communication, documentation, and teamwork are well worth the time—and will enable your team to create something even greater in the future.

As your business grows, the scale and speed at which you need to create content, UI screens, and other designs grows. This presents a double challenge: 

    How do you optimize the creation process so your teams don’t get stuck reinventing the wheel every time you need a new site page or piece of content? 
    How do you keep all of your new designs consistent as your site or product grows?

A modern design system can be the answer, helping your teams generate new designs quickly and ensuring consistency with existing material. 

A design system is a complete set of standards intended to manage design at scale using reusable components and patterns. – Nielsen Norman

Modern design systems have many benefits, including allowing your teams to focus the majority of their resources on larger, more complex problems, creating a shared language between teams, and fostering visual consistency across products and channels.

If you’re interested in implementing a modern design system in your organization, several key elements make the process more effective and efficient. We’ll share three of our favorites.
1. Create a shared language

One of the core benefits of implementing a modern design system is the shared language between departments. Designers, developers, and marketers can all reference and create from a single source of information. Collaborative tools help facilitate this work.

Some teams implement design tokens, which are often seen as the building blocks of a design system, expressed as data. Design tokens are all the individual “values” that dictate design elements like color, spacing, typography, etc. Defining these values creates unity and scalability, ensuring you can quickly create new patterns and components that adhere to your established design standards and with fewer resources. 

Key benefit: At Think Company, we use tools like Figma and Storybook to help bridge the gap between teams and drive collaboration. Design tokens increase scalability and efficiency for systems and large product design and development projects.
2. Formalize your processes with DesignOps

Design Operations, more commonly referred to as DesignOps, is the framework that we build within. DesignOps is made up of processes that help your team navigate any challenges that may arise in the design process. Some of our commonly-used processes include:

    Communication documentation—the overall workflow including who is involved, responsible, and informed.
    Intake process—adding components, enhancements, updates, and reporting bugs.
    Issue management process—how to resolve a problem, who is resolving it, and the resolution’s status.
    Release communications—the system that notifies internal users about changes.
    Link to changelog—a list of all archived changes made in the version history.

Key benefit: Implementing DesignOps allows you to configure your teams in ways that drive productivity and scalable success.
3. Drive adoption

Keeping your team regularly informed about updates to your design system is crucial to driving its adoption. One of the best ways to promote engagement is by demonstrating new functionalities, “Getting Started” guides, training workshops, and other educational methods.

A design system no one knows about or uses has no benefits and accrues design and tech debt. You develop a shared sense of ownership across teams by communicating about your design system regularly—via Slack, your internal Wiki, email, etc. 

Key benefit: Keeping the design system front-of-mind promotes ease of use and fast design iteration.
Implementing a modern design system

A modern design system is a shared language that allows cross-functional teams to create content and designs more effectively. It streamlines the creation process, keeps new designs consistent across channels, and drives sustainable growth. 

By utilizing design tokens, collaborative tools, and focusing on DesignOps, you can harness the most significant benefits of a modern design system and create new designs that drive growth across your organization.



Good design is at the heart of a company or product’s success. Whether your user is a person shopping for cookware or an internal customer support representative, everyone using a digital product expects it to look great and function beautifully.

But even if you have a great design, what can often undercut a design’s success is how consistently it’s executed. And creating net new content or products consistent with pre-established designs can be laborious, time-consuming, and it still may not look quite right.

Enter, the design system.


What is a design system?

A design system combines the benefits of a style guide (intended for designers) and a pattern library (intended for developers) into a single, cohesive database for everyone.

A design system is composed of a UI library, storefront, and operations. We’ll go into even more detail on these components later.

    The UI library includes styles, patterns, and documentation for designers and developers.
    The storefront is a location where any person can access design system information.
    Operations provides the guidance and tooling required for managing the creation and ongoing evolution of the design system.

Design system goals are to align product teams and foster collaboration between development and design. While a design system is a great asset to your team, it will need maintenance and governance to be the most effective as the system evolves.

In your design career, you may be asked to repair or rethink an existing design system. It’s going to be messy. Designers, developers, product owners, and stakeholders must be involved and informed. But if you put in the work and stick to it, you will come out on the other side feeling like a champion.

The steps below break down the process we follow at Think Company to establish, evolve, or develop strategies to maintain design systems and governance. It is a design system process that has worked well for our teams and clients—on projects of all shapes and sizes.
Design systems goals and benefits
Consistency

As we mentioned earlier, consistency is one of the primary benefits of using a design system. By having one centralized database for designers and developers to draw from, fonts, colors, and code stay consistent as you grow.
Collaboration

By creating a central location for design and development information, cross-functional teams can communicate and collaborate more efficiently throughout an entire project.
Speed

With all of this consistency and collaboration comes greater speed. With UI components and elements already agreed upon, your team can build new designs quickly and easily.
Components of a design system
Illustration by Shawn Hickman, Manager, Design
UI Library

The UI library is a set of styles, components, and patterns that are used by designers and developers to create the user interface for the product.

It contains:

    Sketch and Figma libraries
    Storybook with coded components
    Documentation

Storefront

Storefronts are the single source of truth for a design system. It’s where any adopter (designers, developers, etc.) can access the processes, documentation, and tooling needed for using the system.

It contains:

    Documentation
    Assets and Files

Operations

Operations is the management and evolution of the design system. It’s the behind-the-scenes work powering successful systems and defines how people can contribute, get support, stay up to date, and more.
What is design system governance?

When we create a design system governance model specifically tailored for your team and culture, we’re creating a design system hierarchy. This includes details about:

    Decision-making: Who has final authority
    Contribution: Who can add and make changes to the design system
    Enhancements and workflows: Who implements the design system and how they do it

How to create new or improve existing design systems

Design systems are more than just a UI library— they are the infrastructure your team needs to scale. Having centrally-located and well-defined processes, documentation, and tooling enables your team to ship with more confidence and higher quality. Team exercises can be helpful to understand your design system goals and get everyone on the same page. Below are steps to create and improve your design system and design system process. If you don’t have a current design system and are starting from scratch, focus on creating a design system inventory, audit, or model for the products the system will serve.
Illustrative model depicting the steps to creating a design system
1. Start with a design system inventory

To start, spend time identifying and categorizing patterns within the existing design system.

    Hunt and Gather – Go through each screen of the application and take screenshots of unique instances of the elements that build up the interface: typography, color, input fields, iconography, navigation, images, buttons, etc. These screenshots will help you visually analyze everything later on.
    Work Fast – You should capture things reasonably quickly. Leave all judgments for the design audit.

Recommended tools

    Airtable is another excellent place to store and organize your screenshots and opinions. We’re big fans of this tool.
    Miro will allow you to collect screenshots and thoughts like on a giant whiteboard—and more!

2. Audit existing design system components

You built the foundation for your design audit during the design system inventory. Now it’s time to get critical about the styles, patterns, and components you’ve collected. If four different date pickers do the same thing, you can consolidate those into one component.

    Categorize – Take your screenshots and group them to see the elements together. This will help you identify differences and commonalities.
    Understand – Try to make sense of what you have so far. How do these components work? How should they work?
    Compare and Contrast – Look into best practices and link to articles. Is there anything a component could do better? Are there any rules that have been broken?
    Take Note – More likely than not, you will bump into redundancies. Make a note of the components that you can consolidate. Show your work and explain your thinking.

Recommended tool

    Airtable is ideal for categorizing and analyzing your data. Here are helpful tips for getting started with Airtable.

3. Begin design system modeling

Before you begin tearing down the old design system to build up the new one, you’ll need to have a plan and understand your design system goals. That plan will help you understand what should be in the system and, more importantly, what should be left out.

    Define UI Library Objects – Based on the system inventory & audit, compile a list of objects to be included in the UI Library. You’ll want to factor in the client product roadmap, front-end capabilities, design, technical debt, etc.
    Define a Design System Governance Model – A design system is much more than a UI library. The system governance model covers the nuances and operations of an active design system.
    Define Storefront – The system storefront acts as the single source of truth for all system information: processes, guidelines, tools, etc. Define what tool to use for the storefront and how people will contribute to it.
    Align with the Client Team – After defining all parts of the design system, align with the client team. Depending on the engagement, you may need a sizeable multi-hour working session or set up a regular, casual meeting.

Recommended tool

    Google Slides is a great way to document, present, and share your plan with stakeholders.

4. Collaborate to improve the design systems

Design systems are not created—or reimagined—in a vacuum. It’s time to share your findings and get input. This is a chance to refine concepts and clearly outline the work ahead. These discussions should include stakeholders and developers as well as designers. You can handle the discussion in a few ways:

    One-on-One – Get together with a design lead, stakeholder, product owner, or another decision-maker and dig through the inventory. Keeping the number of opinions in the room small will keep you focused as you refine.
    Bring it to the Team – Explore your findings with your team. Collectively, the team will have a larger pool of knowledge to draw from, which will help fine-tune the design inventory.
    Keep it Digital – If your team is busy and time to meet is scarce, drop your inventory and any necessary explanation into Slack, Teams, or an email. This will allow your team the time they need to review your findings and give feedback.

5. Create the design system

The design system inventory gave you a bird’s-eye view of the existing design system. The design audit helped you understand what needed to change, and the system model gave you a plan. Now, it’s time to do the work and explain the new system to everyone else.

    Design – Using all the evidence gathered so far, start making meaningful changes to the existing system.
    Write the Rules – How does your system implement large buttons vs. small buttons? How will specific colors be used? Write it down and make it straightforward so that any designer picking up the system can implement it without a lot of guesswork.
    Show, Don’t Tell – Whenever possible, illustrate how things work. Create diagrams to help everyone understand what the components in your system do.
    Refine – This is not a one-and-done process. Make sure to review existing rules to ensure they’re still applicable. A design system is a living document that will change over time.
    Build – Bring the system to life by building new patterns and adjusting existing ones.

6. Review with the team again

Now that you have documented your components, it’s time to share your work and get feedback. Make sure to include people outside of the design team.

    Gain a Consensus – Review the documentation and get approval or feedback from your team. If there are changes, take them back to the documentation phase and make the necessary adjustments.

7. Publish your new design system

You’re done (for now)! Push the finalized documentation to the storefront. But before you do:

    Double-Check Your Work – Have all requested changes been made? Did you catch all of the typos? Go through everything one more time to ensure it’s as clean as possible.
    Celebrate – You’re on your way to a more perfect design system! Every designer and developer who comes after you will thank you for your time and effort.

A real-world example of a design system

Here at Think Company our design system, or Think Standard Library, is a set of foundational styles, components, and patterns that our designers and developers use to create the user interface for a product. It contains our Design Library (with tools like Figma and Sketch), Storybook with coded components, and documentation. This extensive library is the go-to source of truth and helps our content strategists, designers, and developers work more efficiently.
design system example
More resources for building and maintaining your design system

    If you want to learn more about assessment, Brad Frost’s Interface Inventory takes an in-depth look at the inventory/audit process.
    Hannah Brinkman’s Your Enterprise Team Has a Design System, But is it Working? The blog post dives into the importance of maintaining and evolving your design system, rather than adopting a “set it and forget it” mindset.
    Keith Rich’s How to Use Kanban to Manage a Design System is an excellent look at using Trello to manage a process like the one outlined above.
    Shawn Hickman’s and Amanda Kalk’s webinar Why Your Design System isn’t Working is a deep dive into why your design system might not be working and what you can do about it.
    Shawn Hickman’s webinar Understanding Design Systems explains design systems and their value to teams and organizations.
    Alyssa Martin’s, Mike Wyatt’s, and Nick Olshefski’s The 3 Building Blocks of a Successful Modern Design System covers key elements of a modern design system.

Implement a design system and streamline your design and development process

With a well-defined design system, your developers and product owners can make better design decisions—even without the presence of a designer. The right tools will allow your team to make better decisions about things like when to use a modal, what type of button to use, or which chart to use for specific types of data.

Having a well-maintained design system makes it easier than ever to create content that meets your design standards and moves you closer to your business goals.